---
category: writing

title:  "Lacville '79"
year: "2014"
tagline:    "Some thoughts on Devin The Dude's *Lacville '79*"
---
Along with *What A Job* and *Doobie Ashtray*, *Lavcille '79'* is one of Devin The Dude's most successful singles. He produced the song himself and released it on his 2002 sophomore album, *Just Tryin' To Live*.  It's a classic laid-back smoke-and-ride song.

## Context: Your Favorite Rapper's Favorite Rapper

I first got into Devin after reading a [brief but glowing introduction](http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/06/06/050606gore_GOAT_recordings1) to his work by the *New Yorker*'s then new pop music columnist, the quite-astute Sasha Frere-Jones. Drawn in by an even ravier [interview](http://www.prefixmag.com/features/devin-the-dude/your-favorite-rappers-favorite-rapper/12400/) in Prefixmag that called him, "the greatest hip-hop artist you've never heard," and went on to say he's, "one of the most respected and sought-after artists in the industry. As one of the few emcees who has worked with the best in the underground, mainstream, East, West and South, "indeed, his 2007 hit *What A Job* included both Andree 3000 and Snoop Dogg, and *Just Tryin To Live* had a feature from Nas and production from DJ Premier and Dr. Dre, "Devin is your favorite rapper's favorite rapper". But who *is* Devin The Dude?

<!--more-->

## Devin The Dude

He's a rapper from Houston. Relegated to the underground. He raps about things he likes: weed, women, music, chillin'. [This random blog](http://passionweiss.com/2013/10/25/devin-the-dude-on-the-road/) said, "His introspective and sometimes self-deprecating lyrics coupled with his sheepish grin make him a likable rap everyman." It went on to say that, "Scarface has previously said that an artist should keep remaking the same album and carve a lane for themselves rather than trying to do something new. Despite that not always being true, Devin definitely followed this formula." *Lacville '79* illustrates the everyman vibe.

## The song

*Lacville '79* is named after Devin's shitty car: a 1979 Cadillac *Coup De Ville*. It starts off as if it's about smoking blunts and driving around, but then it swivels around the point when he says, "I go about 47 in a 55". The Dude goes on to mention his problems with mechanics, how he, "hear[s] bumps and crunks, pings and ticks and dings," and how people "talk," "diss," "heckle," and "laugh."

The chorus has a positive upbeat sound. He puts his problems in perspective: his car is too old to get stolen, and he's, "smokin' weed and feelin' fine." Even in his shitty old car. It really is a song for the people.
