---
category: writing

title:  "Jay-Z vs. Nas"
year: "2014"
tagline:    "Some thoughts on the Jay-Z vs. Nas beef, as characterized by *Ether* and *Takeover*"
---
One of the most notable historical 'beefs' in hip-hop, now resolved, was between Nas and Jay-Z. The beef heated up over the early 2000s, officially concluding in 2006. It spawned a number of classic diss tracks, most notably including *Ether*, *Takeover*, *Got Ur Self A*, and *Supa Ugly*.

## Context

When Biggie died in 1997, New York needed a new king. The primary contenders were Nas and Jay-Z.

Through the 90s, Nas was a darling of the NYC Hip Hop scene. He achieved huge commercial and critical success, beginning with his standout debut album, *Illmatic*. However, by the late 90s, the quality of his output had started to fade, and 1999's *Nastradamus* was pretty terrible, especially in comparison to his earlier work.

<!--more-->

Jay was a relative newcomer: he made his debut in 1996 with *Reasonable Doubt*, to this day his strongest album, but by 1999 he had surpassed Nas' sales, and his label, Roc-A-Fella, dominated urban contemporary radio. Both he and Nas were formidable rappers, well positioned to take the throne.

The tension started to heat up, when Prodigy, a member of Mobb Deep and a good friend of Nas', perceived that Jay-Z was disrespecting his Queensbridge compatriot. [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jay-Z%E2%80%93Nas_feud) quotes Prodigy as saying,

>> So when I heard that, I was like, “Who is Jay talking about who is talking about hanging in Marcy in they line?” Then I thought about “Trife Life” in my verse I said “jetted through Marcy ‘cause D’s[detectives] ain’t baggin’ me” because I was out there...Then “Shook Ones” came out, then Jay came with the plastic cups, football jerseys in the projects, taking jabs at us. I was like Nas, what we need to do is go at these niggas because number one, his lil’ man is trying to shit on you; talking about your life is written and all this shit.

While Nas kept quiet, Prodigy slowly escalated the beef, repeatedly taking shots in interviews at Jay-Z and the Roc-A-Fella roster. Eventually, in 2001, Jay-Z kicked things up a notch and debuted *Takeover*, the debut single off of his acclaimed 6th album, *The Blueprint*, at *Hot 97*'s 2001 Summer Jam, where his historical performance even included an [appearance by Michael Jackson](http://www.defjam.com/from-the-vault-jay-z-brings-out-michael-jackson-at-2001-hot97fm-summer-jam/). The track is a direct diss track, targeting both Prodigy and Nas, and the first album track to come out of the feud.

Not to be outdone, Nas came back with *Ether*, an even harder-hitting diss. The track was so fierce, that in the words of [Son Raw](http://passionweiss.com/2012/09/11/the-25-greatest-outdated-rap-slang-words/), whom Wikipedia deems credible enough to quote, “To 'ether' someone means to completely dismantle them in a rap battle with no regard for petty concerns such as 'logic' or 'cleverness' – it’s a giant shock-n-awe display of machismo meant to scar the victim for life and leave an unmistakable blemish on his career." The track revived Nas' career, and and *he* headlined *Hot 97*'s Summer Jam in 2002 and 2003.

## Takeover

The earliest-dated Kanye West production in my iTunes library, Takeover came out on September 11, 2001. Lauded by Complex as the [Best Diss Track Of All Time](http://www.complex.com/music/2011/06/the-50-best-hip-hop-diss-songs/jay-z-takeover-2001). The track features an almost Dilla-level-prominent bassline sampled from The Doors' *Five To One*, slowed down a bit and with some crazy saturator/limiter action to heat it up.

The beat is notable for Kanye's extremely pointed use of vocal samples. The third verse makes especially creative use of David Bowie's *Fame* as a foreground element: the sampled word 'fame,' edited to sound like 'lame,' is interspersed through Jay's lyrics, for example, "That's why your ["LAAAAAAME" sample] career's come to an end."

Lyrically, the verses divide the song into thematic sections. Jay spends the first verse signifying, with bombastic lines like, "God MC - me - Jay-hova // Hey lil soldier, you ain't ready for war // R.O.C. too strong for y'all." I see this as a pump-up verse, getting ready for the divisive verses to follow.

The second verse focuses on Mobb Deep, and feels to me like another warm-up to the Nas part. Not to say Jay didn't go in: it effectively ended the meaningful phase in Mobb Deep's career. Their next album, *Infamy*, prominently featured two Jay-Z disses, attempted to replace their grimy sound with a poppier aesthetic, and generally wasn't good.

The fresh use of the aforementioned *Fame* samples draw attention to the third verse, the song's longest and most interesting. Jay spends the verse dissecting Nas. Interestingly, in lines like, "Had a spark when you started but now you're just garbage," Jay several times acknowledges the greatness of *Illmatic*. This makes his argument stronger: *Illmatic* really is a classic, and to dispute that would make Jay's other claims less credible; by bringing attention to Nas' early greatness, Jay makes his diss all the more poignant.

>>	You said you've been in this 10, I've been in it 5 - smarten up, Nas //
>>	4 albums in 10 years, nigga? I could divide //
>>	That's one every...let's say 2 //
>>	2 of them shits was due //
>>	1 was "nah," the other was Illmatic //
>>	That's a one-hot-album-every-10-year average

## Ether

Ether was produced by Ron Browz. The beat employs a digital production aesthetic, using programmed drums and synthesizers and no samples after the opening. It opens with some gunshots, directly from *Who Shot Ya*, and a sample of the line "Fuck Jay-Z" from Tupac's not-even-a-diss-song, *Fuck Friendz*.

Like *Takeover*, *Ether* starts slow. The first verse is about how Nas is cool, and the second verse is about how Jay-Z is lame, and neither contains much more specific content than that.

 In the 32-bar third verse, however, Nas goes into specifics. If *Takeover* stuck to one main argument ('you used to be good and now you are bad'), *Ether* does the opposite, using a shotgun-approach to bombard the Jay-Z and the Roc family with specific targeted callouts:

*	Jay Z hangs out with commercially successful artists to capitalize on their success

*	Foxy Brown only featured on "Ain't No Nigga" because of a secret affair between her and Jay (which she later confirmed)

*	"[Jay Z] traded [his] soul for riches"

*	Jay Z steals rhymes from the late, great, Biggie Smalls

*	Jay Z hates women

Much like Jay's argument in Takeover, these callouts are all pretty correct. *Ether* and *Takeover* both have gone on to be recognized as some of the best diss tracks in hip hop. While both rappers have continued on to have successful and long-lasting careers, Jay-Z is still a corporate shill, and Nas still hasn't had an album better than Illmatic.

## Conclusion

I think the most interesting thing that came out of these two songs is the semi-beef between Kanye West and Ron Brows. In an interview with *XXL*, Ron re-contextualized the beef as sampling-vs-synthesis, amusingly attempting to de-legitimize sampling and discredit a huge part of Hip-Hop's history:

>>	Come on. I did that from scratch. Kanye sampled it. Come on. My mother can go in the house and listen to a record, chop that, chop that and make that. You know I heard Kanye when he was saying that, “How can people compare them?” I did that from scratch, the keyboard, a drum machine, my drum patterns. That’s me playing the keyboard with the strings and all the additional percussion. And it was hard. That’s a sample. Come on, anybody can do that. Is y’all playing? “Yo, it’s better.” Nah. I mean, I don’t know who produced [“Takeover”]. Kanye know, man. He know deep in his heart what beat is harder. And you can just do a survey.

I think Kanye West and Ron Brows' respective careers settle issue pretty conclusively.
